doc: matter: Added page describing Matter bridge architecture (#12576)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/overview/bridge.rst

.. _ug_matter_overview_bridge:

Matter Bridge
#############

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The Matter bridge is a device that allows to use non-Matter IoT devices in a Matter fabric together with other native Matter devices.
The non-Matter devices in such configuration are called bridged devices.

> It is out of the Matter specification scope to define connectivity technologies used by the bridged devices, so they can use any technology (for example Bluetooth LE or Zigbee), as long as bridge device supports it too.

Reviewer: Maybe it is worth adding here that we operate within the Application Layer only and translate the Matter data model to other Protocol application layers and vice versa, and do not translate protocols themselves within the lower layers.

Especially, this endpoint uses Descriptor cluster with PartsList attribute to store all endpoints representing the bridged devices connected to the bridge.

Additionally, the bridge represents every bridged device using one or more Matter endpoints, depending on the functionalities supported by the device.
Every bridged device exposed by the bridge has to fulfill all requirements for corresponding Matter device type.
Unlike native Matter nodes, the bridged device has dedicated Bridged Device Basic Information cluster enabled on its endpoint to provide basic information about the device.

Bridged devices can be added to bridge or removed from it at runtime, so the list of endpoints exposed by the bridge may be dynamically updated.

Implementation in |NCS|
***********************

The |NCS| delivers reference implementation of the Matter bridge core that is located in the :file:`samples/matter/common/bridge` directory.
The core implementation provides basic bridge functionalities and generic API that is not dependent on any specific connectivity technology.

> Beside of the core part, the |NCS| also delivers example `matter_bridge_app` that can be used as a reference for creating own application.

Reviewer: Link to the app README page?

Author: Oh right, I thought `matter_bridge_app` will work as a link, but it didn't. I will fix it.

The Matter bridge performs translation between Matter data model and the data representation specific for other protocol.

> It is not possible to provide a generic translation between Matter and all IoT protocols, thus the |NCS| implementation supports only Bluetooth LE protocol.
> Nevertheless you can also disable Bluetooth LE support and use the core implementation part to create an application bridging Matter to any connectivity technology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not possible to provide a generic translation between Matter and all other IoT protocols.
The |NCS| application implements supports for the Bluetooth LE protocol, but you can also disable Bluetooth LE support and use the core implementation part to create an application bridging Matter to any connectivity technology.
```

> The bridge application can be customized on various fields depending on the supported connectivity protocol, supported Matter device types for bridging or used UI to control the device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bridge application can be customized in various ways depending on the supported connectivity protocol and Matter device types for bridging, or the UI used to control the device.
```

> The following figure illustrates the software components of the bridge core and their relation with the User's application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following figure shows the software components of the bridge core and their relation to the user's application:
```

.. figure:: images/matter_bridge_architecture.svg
   :alt: Matter bridge software architecture

   Matter bridge software architecture

> On the figure above, there are four major software modules included in the Bridge core:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the figure, there are four major software modules included in the Bridge core:
```

> * ``Matter Bridged Device`` - the abstract class that defines common functionalities for all Matter bridged devices.
>                               The User's application can create specific Matter bridged device objects, for example OnOff Light Device, that inherit the base class functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``Matter Bridged Device`` - The abstract class that defines common functionalities for all Matter bridged devices.
  The user's application can create specific Matter bridged device objects, such as OnOff Light Device, that inherit the base class functionality.
```

> * ``Bridged Device Data Provider`` - the abstract class that defines common functionalities for all Bridged Device Data Providers.
>                                      The providers are objects that provide data for Matter bridged devices and represent interface to the bridged device on the non-Matter side.
>                                      The User's application can create specific implementation of a data provider that can, for example obtain data from physical devices using Bluetooth LE protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``Bridged Device Data Provider`` - The abstract class that defines common functionalities for all Bridged Device Data Providers.
  The providers are objects that provide data for Matter bridged devices and represents the interface to the bridged device on the non-Matter side.
  The user's application can create a specific implementation of a data provider that can, for example, obtain data from physical devices using the Bluetooth LE protocol.
```

> * ``Bridge Manager`` - the main object of a bridge that forwards information between bridged devices, their data providers, User's application and Matter stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``Bridge Manager`` - The main object of a bridge.
  It forwards information between bridged devices, their data providers, the user's application, and the Matter stack.
```

> * ``Bridge Storage Manager`` - the software module that is used to persist information about bridged devices connected to the bridge that allows to restore the application state after bridge device reboot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``Bridge Storage Manager`` - The software module that is used to make information about bridged devices connected to the bridge persistent.
  It makes it possible to restore the application state after rebooting the bridge device.
```

.. _ug_matter_overview_bridge:

Matter Bridge
#############

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

A Matter bridge is a device that makes it possible to use non-Matter IoT devices in a Matter fabric together with native Matter devices.
A non-Matter devices used this way is called a *bridged device*.
A Matter bridge exposes the bridged devices to Matter nodes in a fabric as Matter endpoints.
This exposure is transparent, meaning that the Matter nodes are able to communicate with non-Matter bridged devices as if they were native Matter devices.

> It is out of scope for the Matter specification to define connectivity technologies used by the bridged devices, so they can use any technology (for example, Bluetooth® LE or Zigbee) as long as Matter bridge supports it too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is out of scope for the Matter specification to define connectivity technologies used by the bridged devices, so they can use any technology (for example, Bluetooth® LE or Zigbee) as long as the Matter bridge supports it too.
```

The Matter bridge translates between the specific subset of Matter data model and the data representation specific for other protocol.

> It is not the role of a bridge to translate whole traffic between the protocols used on the networking layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not the role of a bridge to translate all traffic between the protocols used on the networking layer.
```

> It is not the role of a bridge to translate all traffic between the protocols used on the networking layer.

Reviewer 3: Maybe, we can state that it is up to product manufacturer (bridge manufacturer) to define which device types on Matter and which bridged devices it supports.

Every bridged device exposed by the bridge has to fulfill all requirements for the corresponding Matter device type.
Unlike native Matter nodes, the bridged device has a dedicated Bridged Device Basic Information cluster enabled on its endpoint to provide basic information about the device.

Since bridged devices can be added to the bridge or removed from it at runtime, the list of endpoints exposed by the bridge can be dynamically updated.

Implementation in the |NCS|
***************************

The |NCS| includes a reference implementation of the Matter bridge core, located in the :file:`samples/matter/common/bridge` directory.
The core implementation is not dependent on any specific connectivity technology, and provides basic bridge functionalities and a generic API.
In addition to the core part, the |NCS| also includes an example :ref:`matter_bridge_app` application that you can use as a reference for creating your own application.

The Matter bridge translates between the Matter data model and the data representation specific for other protocols.
It is not possible to provide a generic translation between Matter and all other IoT protocols.

> The |NCS| application implements supports for the Bluetooth LE protocol, but you can also disable Bluetooth LE support and use the core implementation part to create an application bridging Matter to any connectivity technology.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The |NCS| application implements support for the Bluetooth LE protocol, but you can also disable Bluetooth LE support and use the core implementation part to create an application bridging Matter to any connectivity technology.
```

> The bridge application can be customized in various ways depending on the supported connectivity protocol and Matter device types for bridging, or the UI used to control the device.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The bridge application can be customized in various ways depending on the supported connectivity protocol and Matter device types used for bridging, or the UI used to control the device.
```
?

The following figure shows the software components of the bridge core and their relation to the user's application:

.. figure:: images/matter_bridge_architecture.svg
   :alt: Matter bridge software architecture

   Matter bridge software architecture

In the figure, there are four major software modules included in the Bridge core:

* ``Matter Bridged Device`` - The abstract class that defines common functionalities for all Matter bridged devices.
  The user's application can create specific Matter bridged device objects, such as OnOff Light Device, that inherit the base class functionality.
* ``Bridged Device Data Provider`` - The abstract class that defines common functionalities for all Bridged Device Data Providers.

>   The providers are objects that provide data for Matter bridged devices and represents the interface to the bridged device on the non-Matter side.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  The providers are objects that provide data for Matter bridged devices and represent the interface to the bridged device on the non-Matter side.
```

  The user's application can create a specific implementation of a data provider that can, for example, obtain data from physical devices using the Bluetooth LE protocol.

> * ``Bridge Manager`` - The main object of a bridge.

Reviewer 4: `Main object` sounds a bit odd to me, maybe it's better to refer to it as a `core component/module`

Author: But we described bridge "core", as a group of 4 modules common for all bridge applications, no matter what technologies they use. Would replacing it with principal/chief word work for you?

Reviewer 2: I agree using "core" for two different meanings on the same page isn't great. Would "main component" work?

Author: I updated it with the "main component".
